Combined effects of metformin and coenzyme Q10 on doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity in male wistar rats.
Doxorubicin (DOX) is an effective anticancer drug, but its clinical application is limited due to its severe adverse effects on multiple organs and tissues, particularly cardiotoxicity. Studies suggest that metformin and Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) may help reduce DOX-induced cardiotoxicity. This study investigated the individual and combined effects of metformin and CoQ10 on DOX-induced cardiotoxicity in rats. 36 male Wistar rats were divided into six groups consisting of N_C, C_Dox (25 mg/kg DOX), C_(Met + Q10) (200 mg/kg metformin + 10 mg/kg CoQ10), T_Met (200 mg/kg metformin + 25 mg/kg DOX), T_Q10 (10 mg/kg CoQ10 + 25 mg/kg DOX), and T_(Met + Q10) (200 mg/kg metformin + 10 mg/kg CoQ10 + 25 mg/kg DOX). DOX administration significantly elevated serum CK-MB, LDH (P < 0.05), and tissue MDA (P < 0.001). It also significantly decreased TAC, CAT, GPx (P < 0.001), and SOD (P < 0.01) in heart tissues. Treatment with metformin and CoQ10 significantly restored the biochemical parameters both in the serum and tissue samples and ameliorated the histopathological damage caused by DOX. In conclusion, the combination of metformin and CoQ10 exerted antioxidant and cardioprotective effects against DOX-induced cardiotoxicity.

Safety and tolerability of metformin in overweight and obese patients with dengue: An open-label clinical trial (MeDO).
BACKGROUND: Despite dengue being a major public health problem, there are no antiviral or adjunctive treatments for the disease. Novel therapeutics are needed, particularly for patients at high risk of severe disease, including those living with obesity. Metformin reduces dengue viral replication in vitro through AMPK activation and may also have beneficial immunomodulatory effects. METHODS: We conducted an open label trial at the Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, enrolling 120 patients with dengue and obesity (60 treatment arm, 60 control arm receiving standard of care only). Within the treatment arm, the first 10 patients were prescribed low dose metformin, and the remaining 50 patients received weight-based dosing of 1-1.5g/day. The primary outcome was the number of adverse events (AEs), and secondary outcomes were clinical and laboratory parameters, including fever clearance time, platelet nadir, percentage of haematocrit change from baseline, maximum creatinine and highest AST/ALT, and the kinetics of plasma viraemia and NS1 antigenaemia. RESULTS: The majority of patients in both groups had dengue with warning signs. Six patients in the metformin group and 5 controls developed dengue shock syndrome, and no patients died. There were more AEs recorded in the metformin treated group than in the control group (mean+/-SD: 15 +/- 4 vs. 11 +/- 6), particularly the high-dose metformin group (15 +/- 5). Twenty-five patients (42%) had to stop the study drug due to AEs, including severe diarrhea (n = 12), dengue shock (n = 5), increased lactate of >3mmol/L (n = 4), hypoglycemia (n = 3), and persistent vomiting (n = 1). There were no clear differences in secondary outcomes between the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Metformin was poorly tolerated in patients with dengue, mainly due to gastrointestinal side effects. Metformin did not beneficially affect clinical evolution or virological parameters compared to supportive care alone. Our data does not support progression to larger phase 3 trials of metformin in patients with dengue. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT04377451 (May 6th, 2020).

Risk factors for elevated urinary albumin/creatinine ratio in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients over 60 years old with long-term metformin use.
Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) suffered renal disease with the increase of duration and age. This study aimed to analyze the risk factors for elevated urinary albumin/creatinine ratio (UACR) in T2DM patients over 60 years old with long-term metformin use. Subjects were recruited from Huanglou Community Health Centre of Shanghai from June to December 2022. A total of 466 subjects were included and divided into 2 groups according to 30 mg/g of UACR. Four hundred sixty-six T2DM patients were enrolled in this study, with UACR elevated group (n = 106) and UACR normal group (n = 360). Linear regression showed significant relation between age and UACR elevating. A correlation between urine glucose and urine protein levels was also found. The univariate logistic regression analysis showed that age, smoking, drinking, urine glucose, fatty liver, and homocysteine were related to elevated UACR (all P < .05). The multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that age, drinking, urine glucose, and fatty liver were independently related to elevated UACR elevating (all P < .05). For T2DM over 60 years old patients with long-term metformin use, aging, drinking, urine glucose, and fatty liver were independent risk factors for UACR elevating, which implied those patients should take intervention in advance.

Progress towards a personalized management of antidiabetic medications in the elderly with type 2 diabetes.
INTRODUCTION: Older adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) are increasingly numerous worldwide and present particularly difficult therapeutic challenges, especially concerning the proper selection of antidiabetic medications that offer the best efficacy/safety ratio in this age group. AREAS COVERED: This narrative review summarizes progress toward personalized management involving a three-step process. First, patients should be categorized according to their frailty status. Second, glycemic targets should be properly individualized considering a higher risk of severe hypoglycemia in older patients. Third, the selection of the best antidiabetic medication(s) in order to avoid hypoglycemia but also to offer cardiorenal protection. In this respect, sulfonylureas and insulin therapy are currently less recommended and newer antidiabetic medications are preferred, usually combined with metformin: DPP-4 inhibitors (gliptins) for their better safety profile versus sulfonylureas, GLP-1 analogues or SGLT2 inhibitors (gliflozins) if cardiorenal protection is required. Reducing excessive body weight appears less critical in older patients and sarcopenia should be avoided. EXPERT OPINION: The two most recognized challenges are undertreating healthy older patients while overtreating frailty/ill people. The increasing armamentarium to treat T2DM offers new opportunities to personalize the use of antidiabetic medications according to the clinical profile and need of every older patient with T2DM.

The Effect of Metformin Usage in Patients With Metastatic Colorectal Cancer Receiving First-line Systemic Therapy.
BACKGROUND/AIM: To investigate the effect of metformin usage on progression-free (PFS) and overall (OS) survival in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) receiving first-line systemic therapy. PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a single-center retrospective cohort study of patients aged 18 years or older with histologically confirmed mCRC receiving first-line systemic 5-fluorouracil-based chemotherapy combined with either anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) therapy or anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (bevacizumab) between January 2010 and December 2022. This study examined the effect of metformin on PFS and OS of patients with mCRC. RESULTS: A total of 134 patients were included, with a median age of 59.5 years; 66.4% of the patients were male, and 23.9% had diabetes. Metformin usage was associated with a significant improvement in median PFS (14.0 vs. 9.9 months, p=0.04) but not in median OS (20.7 vs. 19.5 months, p=0.76). In univariate Cox regression for PFS, metformin usage (hazard ratio=0.62, p=0.04) and anti-EGFR therapy (hazard ratio=0.54, p<0.01) were associated with significantly lower hazard ratios. CONCLUSION: Metformin usage in patients with mCRC receiving systemic therapy may improve progression-free survival but does not significantly affect overall survival. This result outlines the potential of metformin in mCRC treatment, especially in enhancing the progression-free survival. Further studies are needed to confirm the role of metformin in systemic treatment of mCRC.

Effect of Metformin on vascular endothelial injury in patients with non-small cell lung cancer treated with chemotherapy combined with bevacizumab.
OBJECTIVE: This paper aimed to unravel the effect of metformin on vascular endothelial injury in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated with chemotherapy combined with bevacizumab. METHODS: We recruited 120 NSCLC patients and then classified into A and B groups (n = 60 cases). A group was treated with chemotherapy + bevacizumab + metformin, and B group was treated with chemotherapy + bevacizumab. The efficacy, pro-inflammatory factors, immune factors, and markers of vascular endothelial injury before and after treatment were compared between the two groups. The incidence of adverse reactions and prognostic 1-year survival status during the treatment period in both groups were counted. RESULTS: Higher ORR and DCR were observed in Group A relative to Group B. TNF-alpha, IL-2, IL-12, ET-1, TM, and vWF were elevated in both groups after treatment, but were lower in Group A than in Group B. CD(3+), CD4(+), and CD(4+)/CD(8+) were reduced in both groups after treatment, but were higher in Group A than in Group B. OS and DFS were higher in Group A than in Group B. CONCLUSION: Metformin has some anti-inflammatory and immunoprotective effects on NSCLC patients treated with chemotherapy combined with bevacizumab, which may help to attenuate the vascular endothelial injury induced by chemotherapy and bevacizumab treatment and further improve the prognosis.

An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis on the Efficacy and Safety of Metformin as Add-on Therapy to Insulin in Patients With Type 1 Diabetes.
INTRODUCTION: This study aims to perform an updated meta-analysis evaluating the efficacy and safety of metformin adjunct therapy in type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) patients. METHOD: Cochrane, PubMed and Embase were searched for randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that reported the efficacy and safety of metformin in T1DM patients. Statistical analyses were performed using STATA software. RESULTS: Twenty-nine placebo-controlled RCTs enrolling 2051 T1DM patients were included. Adolescents experienced a notable reduction in total insulin daily dose (TIDD) (mean difference [MD] = -0.61 [95% confidence interval (CI): -1.02, -0.20] units/kg per day) and levels of haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) (MD = -0.45 [95% CI: -0.79, -0.11]), total cholesterol (TC) (MD = -0.78 [95% CI: -1.54, -0.02]), and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (MD = -0.69 [95% CI: -1.36, -0.02]) at 3 months of follow-up with metformin. In adults, metformin significantly reduced Body Mass Index (BMI) (MD = -0.71 [95% CI: -1.23, -0.19]), TIDD (MD = -0.44 [95% CI: -0.73, -0.16]), and levels of HbA1c (MD = -0.70 [95% CI: -1.10, -0.30]) and TC (MD = -0.60 [95% CI: -1.09, -0.10]) at 6 months. The risk of gastrointestinal adverse events (GIAEs) was significantly higher in both adolescents (Relative Risk [RR] = 1.74 [95% CI: 1.38, 2.21]) and adults (RR = 3.24 [95% CI: 1.49, 7.02]). All of the above had p-values less than 0.05. The metformin group showed no differences in BMI Z-score, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) level, or diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) risk. No statistical difference was identified for any of the outcomes at other follow-up endpoints. CONCLUSIONS: Metformin may reduce TIDD and levels of HbA1c, TC, triglycerides (TG), and LDL in T1DM adolescents. BMI, TIDD, and levels of HbA1c and TC may decrease in adults. Moreover, it may raise the risk of GIAEs in both age groups.

Real-World Harm Reduction of Metformin Plus DPP4 Inhibitors versus Metformin Plus Sulfonylureas in Older Adults: A Target Trial Emulation Using German Claims Data.
OBJECTIVE: This study complements evidence from randomized controlled trials on the harms (e.g., hypoglycemia) of sulfonylureas compared with dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (DPP4i) in the treatment of type 2 diabetes in older adults using real-world data. Existing evidence suggests an increased risk of hypoglycemia, falls, fractures, and cardiovascular events. METHODS: Using target trial emulation, we analyzed a retrospective cohort drawn from German routine claims data. We included patients older than 65 years who initiated DPP4i (sitagliptin, vildagliptin, or saxagliptin) or sulfonylureas (glibenclamid or glimepirid) as add on to metformin between 2011 and 2018. Confounding was adjusted for through overlap weighting, and the average treatment effects were estimated in the overlap population using generalized linear models. RESULTS: Among 171,318 eligible patients, 111,865 (65%) received DPP4i and 59,453 (35%) sulfonylureas. Patients treated with DPP4i had a higher prevalence of all observed comorbidities. Applying overlap weights to adjust for confounding, patients treated with DPP4i had a higher rate of combined all-cause hospitalizations and outpatient visits compared with those treated with sulfonylureas (rate ratio = 1.03, 95% CI 1.02-1.03) in the total population. In contrast, we found a protective effect of DPP4i on the risk for severe hypoglycemia in the subgroups of new users (ratio rate (RR) = 0.51, 95% CI 0.33, 0.76) and patients with severe renal insufficiency (RR = 0.31, 95% CI 0.16, 0.61). CONCLUSIONS: Deprescribing sulfonylureas and using DPP4i instead may slightly reduce harm in some subgroups of older adults, which supports recommendations of existing lists of potentially inappropriate medications.

The safety and efficacy of liraglutide combined with metformin in clinical treatment of polycystic ovary syndrome patients: a meta-analysis.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to investigate the effectiveness and safety of the combination of liraglutide and metformin for clinical treatment of patients with polycystic ovary syndrome. METHODS: Computerized searches were performed on PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, The Cochrane Library, CNKI, CBM, Wanfang, and VIP databases to collect randomized controlled trials(RCT) on the efficacy of metformin and liraglutide in the treatment of polycystic ovary syndrome. The search period spanned from the inception of the databases to August 2024. Following literature screening, data extraction, and risk of bias assessment in the included studies, two reviewers independently conducted meta-analysis using RevMan 5.4 software. RESULTS: A total of 12 RCT involving 1096 patients were analyzed. The meta-analysis revealed that the group receiving metformin combined with liraglutide demonstrated superiority over the group receiving metformin alone in terms of body mass index (BMI), glucose levels, lipid levels, hormone levels, establishment of menstrual cycles, normal ovulation rate, and rate of spontaneous conception. However, the former group also exhibited a higher incidence of gastrointestinal reactions compared to the latter group. CONCLUSION: Current data indicates that the combination of liraglutide and metformin can effectively enhance glucose and lipid metabolism in Polycystic Ovary Syndrome infertility patients. Additionally, it can reduce serum sex hormone levels, leading to significant clinical therapeutic effects. This treatment also improves pancreatic islet and ovarian function, ultimately increasing the rate of ovulation and pregnancy. It is important to note that correct administration methods must be followed to minimize adverse reactions.

[Jianpi Qinghua Formula improves metabolic-associated fatty liver disease by modulating PGC1alpha/PPARalpha/CPT1A pathway].
Based on the regulation of mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation through the PGC1alpha/PPARalpha/CPT1A pathway, this study investigated the effect of Jianpi Qinghua Formula on the mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation pathway in the livers of mice with metabolic-associated fatty liver disease(MAFLD) induced by a high-fat diet. MAFLD mice were fed a high-fat diet to establish the model, and after successful modeling, the mice were divided into the model group, the Jianpi Qinghua Formula group, and the metformin group, with an additional control group. Each group was treated with the corresponding drug or an equivalent volume of saline via gavage. Body mass and food intake were measured regularly during the experiment. At the end of the experiment, blood lipid levels and liver function-related indices were measured, liver pathological changes were observed, and protein expression levels of PGC1alpha, PPARalpha, PPARgamma, and CPT1A were detected by Western blot. The results showed that, with no difference in food intake, compared to the model group, the body mass of the Jianpi Qinghua Formula group and the metformin group was reduced, liver weight and liver index decreased, and levels of cholesterol, triglycerides, and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol(LDL-C) were lowered. Additionally, a decrease in alanine aminotransferase(ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase(AST) was observed. Hematoxylin and eosin(HE) staining revealed reduced pathological damage to hepatocytes, while oil red O staining showed improvement in fatty infiltration. The liver disease activity score decreased, and transmission electron microscopy revealed improvement in mitochondrial swelling and restoration of internal cristae. Western blot analysis indicated that Jianpi Qinghua Formula significantly increased the expression of PGC1alpha, PPARalpha, and CPT1A proteins in the liver and reduced the expression of PPARgamma. These results suggest that the Jianpi Qinghua Formula improves mitochondrial function, promotes fatty acid oxidation, and alleviates the pathological changes of MAFLD. In conclusion, Jianpi Qinghua Formula can improve MAFLD by mediating mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation through the PGC1alpha/PPARalpha/CPT1A pathway.

Protocol for a Randomized Phase II/III Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Trial to Evaluate the Safety and Efficacy of Extended-Release Metformin in Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment: Metformin in Alzheimer Dementia Prevention (MAP).
BACKGROUND: Metformin has been suggested as a possible strategy for the prevention of Alzheimer disease (AD) and AD related dementias. An early phase II clinical trial of short acting metformin versus placebo showed preliminary evidence of efficacy and safety in slowing cognitive decline among persons with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) without diabetes. OBJECTIVE: To conduct a phase II/III randomized clinical of extended-release metformin versus placebo in participants with aMCI without diabetes. METHODS: Ratio of 1:1 randomized placebo-controlled trial of extended-release metformin in 326 persons with aMCI without diabetes, aged 55 to 90 years, lasting 18 months, with 4 visits every 6 months including baseline. The primary outcome is changes in total recall in the Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test. Secondary outcomes include (1) changes in global cognitive performance, measured with the Alzheimer Disease Cooperative Study Preclinical Alzheimer Cognitive Composite (ADCS-PACC); (2) changes in neurodegeneration, ascertained as cortical thickness in areas affected by AD on brain MRI; (3) changes in cerebrovascular disease, ascertained as white matter hyperintensities (WMH) volume on brain MRI; (4) changes in whole brain amyloid ss (Ass) SUVR and in incident amyloid positivity; (5) changes in tau SUVR in a composite brain region comprising medial and inferolateral temporal cortex; (6) changes in plasma AD biomarkers. CONCLUSION: Observational studies and pilot trials suggest that metformin may help prevent cognitive decline in neurodegenerative disorders. This clinical trial aims to assess metformin's potential in preventing cognitive decline in at-risk individuals and its impact on biomarkers indicative of disease modification.

Preoperative management of diabetes mellitus: A comparative narrative review of the recommendations of three professional organizations with Hamad Medical Corporation guidelines.
BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a prevalent condition that requires careful management in the perioperative setting to reduce surgical risks and optimize patient outcomes. The preoperative care of diabetic patients is complex because glucose control must be balanced with minimizing hypoglycemic or hyperglycemic events during surgery. A variety of diabetic medications such as insulin, dipeptidyl-peptidase-4 inhibitors, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists, sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors, and biguanides such as metformin present unique challenges and considerations due to their different mechanisms, benefits, and potential adverse effects. In recent years, professional organizations have developed recommendations on the perioperative management of these therapies, although there remain some variations in guidelines related to medication cessation and dosage adjustments. Standardized protocols in preoperative DM care remain a topic of interest to ensure consistent and safe practices across healthcare settings, and further collaborative research efforts could provide clarity and consensus in managing this diverse patient population. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to provide an overview of guidelines and practices to support healthcare professionals in delivering improved preoperative care for diabetic patients. This initiative aims to enhance surgical outcomes and minimize the occurrence of complications. METHODS: This is a comparative review that provides a systematic comparison of the similarities and differences in the guidelines and recommendations of three professional organizations along with Hamad Medical Corporation. All guidelines were from official websites including Hamad Medical Corporation. CONCLUSION: Although the reviewed guidelines for the preoperative care of diabetes patients share some similarities, there are also a number of differences due to outdated data and expert opinions, and therefore differ in practices around the world. While the key elements are agreed upon, more research and global collaboration are needed to create consistent guidelines and improve patient outcomes.

Efficacy and Safety of Pioglitazone Add-On in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Inadequately Controlled With Metformin and Dapagliflozin: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomised Controlled Trials.
BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) accounts for over 90% of diabetes cases worldwide. Pioglitazone, a thiazolidinedione, enhances insulin sensitivity by activating PPAR-gamma. Evidence on its efficacy and safety as an add-on to metformin and SGLT2 inhibitors in inadequately controlled T2DM is limited. This systematic review and meta-analysis evaluates pioglitazone's role as a third-line therapy for improving glycaemic control in addition to metformin and Dapagliflozin. METHODOLOGY: We conducted comprehensive searches across PubMed, CENTRAL, WOS, Scopus and EMBASE until December 2024. Pooled data were reported using risk ratio (RR) for dichotomous outcomes and mean difference (MD) for continuous outcomes, along with a 95% confidence interval (CI). This systematic review and meta-analysis is registered with PROSPERO ID: CRD42024612005. RESULTS: We included three RCTs with 885 patients. Pioglitazone add-on therapy significantly reduced HbA1c levels (MD: -0.41; 95% CI: -0.54 to -0.27, p = < 0.00001, I(2) = 0%), fasting blood glucose (MD: -11.91; 95% CI: -16.34 to -7.48, p = < 0.00001, I(2) = 0%), Homeostatic Model Assessment for Insulin Resistance (HOMA-IR) (MD: -0.65; 95% CI: -1.05 to -0.25, p = 0.001, I(2) = 4.89%), increased the rate of achieving HbA1c < 7% (RR: 2.09; 95% CI: 1.66 to 2.64, p = < 0.00001, I(2) = 0%), and HbA1c < 6.5% (RR: 2.19; 95% CI: 1.36 to 3.53, p = 0.001, I(2) = 0%). However, there was no difference regarding Homeostasis model assessment of beta-cell function (HOMA-beta) between the two groups (MD: 2.73; 95% CI: -5.24 to 10.70, p = 0.5, I(2) = 27.53%). CONCLUSION: Pioglitazone add-on therapy significantly improved glycaemic control by reducing HbA1c, fasting blood glucose and HOMA-IR while increasing the likelihood of achieving HbA1c targets. However, no significant difference was observed in HOMA-beta between groups. These findings suggest the potential benefit of pioglitazone in enhancing glycaemic outcomes in diabetes management.

The role of diabetes mellitus on delirium onset: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
BACKGROUND: Delirium may develop in association with an underlying cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease and complicates one out of three medical admissions representing a significant economic burden for healthcare systems. However, a clear relationship between delirium onset and diabetes mellitus has not been clarified. The purpose of this study was to explore the association between DM and delirium with the following aims: (a) to assess the incidence of delirium among DM patients (b) to assess the risk of delirium onset in patients with DM (c) to assess the role of anti-diabetic drugs on delirium onset. METHODS: MEDLINE, Scopus, and Web of Science and ClinicalTrials.gov were searched from inception up to 30th of December 2024. Studies reporting the incidence of delirium in diabetic patients, delirium events in diabetic patients compared to non- diabetic patients, and the role of antidiabetic drugs on delirium development were considered. RESULTS: The pooled incidence of delirium resulted 29% (95% CI 26.0%- 33.0% I2 = 99.6%). The OR for developing delirium resulted: 1.78 (95% CI 1.59-1.99 i2 = 88.3%) Intranasal insulin administration compared to placebo groups was characterized by a RR = 0.34 (95% CI 0.23-0.52). Metformin use compared to non-metformin use in diabetic patients was characterized by lower RR for delirium: pooled RR = 0.71 (95% CI 0.59-0.85, I2 = 84.8%). CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of delirium in patients with diabetes is about 29% and patients with diabetes have higher odds of delirium. Chronic use of metformin, and intranasal insulin administration before surgery may offer benefits in the prevention of delirium. These findings are characterized by significant heterogeneity which hampers their interpretation. Future research for developing diabetes-specific delirium screening protocols, and evidence-based preventive interventions is needed.

Evaluation of the Antidiabetic Potential of Methanolic Extract of Clerodendrum infortunatum Compared to Metformin in Streptozotocin-induced Diabetic Rats.
BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus is a prevalent metabolic disorder characterized by reduced insulin activity leading to hyperglycemia, affecting over 425 million people globally. Traditional treatments, including sulfonylureas and biguanides, often have undesirable side effects, prompting a shift toward herbal remedies for diabetes management and prevention. OBJECTIVE: This study aims to evaluate the antidiabetic effects of budding leaves from Clerodendrum infortunatum compared to metformin in preventing streptozotocin (STZ)-induced hyperglycemia in rats. MATERIALS AND METHODS: An in vivo study was conducted using adult male Wistar albino rats. STZ was administered on day 15 and was followed till day 18. Methanolic extract of C. infortunatum (MECI) at different dosages (250, 500, and 1000 mg), metformin (500 mg), and normal saline were administered to different groups of rats. Blood glucose levels (at day 1, 15, and 18) and biochemical parameters (lipid profile, hepatic and renal parameters, and oxidative stress markers) were measured at days 1 and 18. At the end, a histopathological examination of the pancreas, liver, and kidney was done. Statistical analyses were performed to determine significance. RESULTS: The study found that while the MECI at 500 mg/kg showed a significant reduction in blood glucose levels compared to the diabetic control group (P < 0.0001), it was less effective than metformin (P > 0.05). Higher doses of MECI demonstrated potential in improving liver and renal parameters (P < 0.0001), as well as reducing oxidative stress (P < 0.0001) compared to metformin indicating its beneficial effects in diabetic conditions. CONCLUSION: C. infortunatum shows promise as an adjunctive therapy for the prevention of diabetes due to its multifaceted mechanisms, including enhancing insulin secretion and reducing oxidative stress. However, further clinical trials are needed to confirm these findings and establish optimal dosages.

[Voluntary self-poisoning with metformin and antiretroviral therapy drugs].
Metformin is the first-line oral drug prescribed in type 2 diabetes. The main severe side effect of this drug is metformin associated lactic acidosis (MALA), which generally occurs accidentally and rarely in patients with renal failure. We present here a case of voluntary self-poisoning with metformin and antiretroviral therapy drugs. On admission, the patient showed lactic acidosis with a pH of 7.19 (normal ranges: 7.38-7.42) and lactates at 9.40 mmol/L (normal ranges: 0.50-2.20 mmol/L). Metformin and antiretroviral therapy intoxication was confirmed by detecting these drugs with high performance liquid chromatography coupled with diode array detector (HPLC-PDA) and a another HPLC with mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS) then by a metformin dosage at 814 mg/L (therapeutic ranges: 1-2 mg/L). During hospitalization, liver dysfunctionned, contributing to an altered lactate elimination. Therefore, lactic acidosis increased as the patient's state worsened. Therapeutics were inefficient, leading to patient's death 30 hours after presentation. This observation illustrates a rare case of voluntary intoxication with a high dose of metformin and its unusual association with antiretroviral therapy drugs, that could increase lactic acidosis and cause liver failure.

The nephroprotective effect of metformin with cisplatin in bladder cancer: randomized clinical trial.
PURPOSE: Cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy is the mainstay treatment strategy in various forms of carcinomas and sarcomas. However, its dosage and therapeutic efficacy are significantly limited by its nephrotoxicity. Based on metformin renal benefits in different studies, the study aims to determine safety and the potential nephroprotective effect of metformin when used with cisplatin in patients with bladder cancer. METHODS: This was a prospective, randomized, parallel, controlled, open-label study in which 78 chemotherapy naive bladder cancer patients aged 18-65 years and would receive gemcitabine/cisplatin regimen were selected and randomly assigned to treatment or control group in 1:1 allocation. Both groups were receiving cisplatin standard-of-care regimen, whereas metformin (500 mg, twice daily) was added to the treatment group's regimen only. Patients were prospectively followed up for four cycles of gemcitabine/cisplatin with assessment of renal function tests, serum neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), cystatin-c, and metformin's adverse effects. RESULTS: Serum creatinine, serum NGAL, and cystatin-C significantly increased in the control group only (P < 0.001). Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) significantly declines in the control group only (P < 0.001). On the contrary, serum NGAL significantly improved in the treatment group (P = 0.02) with stable and normal mean value of serum creatinine, eGFR, and cystatin-C without a concomitant significant increase in adverse events, such as hypoglycemia, gastrointestinal symptoms, or weight loss compared to the control group. CONCLUSION: Metformin prevented renal damage and deterioration in kidney function in cisplatin-treated patients. Therefore, it is a promising agent in reducing cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity. The study was registered in ClinicalTrials.gov on December, 16, 2023, Identifier Number NCT06215976.

Fotagliptin add-on therapy to metformin in patients with uncontrolled type 2 diabetes: A randomised, multicentre, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.
AIM: Fotagliptin is a novel dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor for glycaemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D). This trial aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of fotagliptin add-on to metformin in patients with T2D. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this phase 3 randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, patients with T2D who had inadequate glycaemic control using metformin alone were randomly allocated to fotagliptin or placebo at a 2:1 ratio for 24-week double-blind treatment period, followed by an open-label treatment with fotagliptin for all patients, making up a total of 52 weeks. All eligible patients were treated with a stable dose of metformin (>/=1500 mg per day). The primary endpoint was the change in HbA1c level from baseline to week 24. Safety was assessed in all patients who received at least one dose of the study drug. RESULTS: After 24 weeks, LS mean change of HbA1c from baseline was -0.81% with fotagliptin versus -0.28% with placebo. Estimated treatment difference for fotagliptin versus placebo of HbA1c was -0.53% (95% confidence interval [CI] -0.68% to -0.39%; p < 0.001). Significantly more patients on fotagliptin than on placebo achieved HbA1c < 7.0% after 24 weeks (38.7% vs. 16.9%; p < 0.001). The incidence of adverse events was similar between the two groups. No severe hypoglycaemia events were reported in patients treated with fotagliptin and metformin combined therapy. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with T2D who experienced inadequate glycaemic control with metformin, fotagliptin achieved a superior and clinically meaningful improvement in glycaemic control compared with placebo.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Drug Combination Treatment: Riluzole, Metformin and Dexamethasone Effect on Glioblastoma Cell.
BACKGROUND/AIM: In glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), a deadly brain tumor, glucose is one of the main fuels for accelerated growth. Patients with GBM are also exposed to excess glucose through hyperglycemia in diabetes mellitus. In addition, dexamethasone (Dex), a corticosteroid commonly administered for controlling cerebral oedema, causes additional excess glucose. Therefore, targeting glucose metabolism is an attractive therapeutic intervention for GBM treatment. We have recently shown that riluzole (Ril), a drug used to treat amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), has an effect on some detrimental Dex-induced metabolic changes in GBM. Therefore, we examined the effect of the combination of metformin (Met), widely used to treat type 2 diabetes, and Ril on GBM cells. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay was used to determine cell viability of U87MG after treatment with Ril, Met, Ril plus Met (Ril+Met) and the addition of Dex to this co-treatment. Cell migration was assessed by the xCELLigence system, matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) activation by zymography assay and gene expression by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). RESULTS: Co-treatment with Ril and Met was effective in killing GBM cells and reducing the expression of genes involved in glucose and stem cell metabolism. Furthermore, combination of Ril and Met reduced MMP2 activation. But co-administration increased the migration of U87MG cells. The addition of Dex to this combination reversed the unfavorable effects of Ril+Met on cell migration. CONCLUSION: Ril+Met co-treatment had a positive effect in terms of GBM cell death, decreased expression of genes involved in glucose metabolism and stemness, and reduced MMP2 activation. Disadvantage of Ril+Met treatment was increased cell migration. Taken together, these drug combinations may also allow the reduction of the concentration of Dex to minimize its side effects.

High-Dose Semaglutide (Up to 16 mg) in People With Type 2 Diabetes and Overweight or Obesity: A Randomized, Placebo-Controlled, Phase 2 Trial.
OBJECTIVE: Studies have demonstrated dose-dependent efficacy of glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists for glycemic control and body weight. The aim of this trial was to characterize the dose-dependent effects of semaglutide (up to 16 mg/week) in people with type 2 diabetes and overweight or obesity. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: In this parallel-group, participant- and investigator-blinded, phase 2 trial, 245 individuals with type 2 diabetes and BMI >/=27 kg/m2 on metformin were randomized to weekly semaglutide (2, 8, or 16 mg s.c.) or placebo for 40 weeks. Doses were escalated every 4 weeks, followed by a maintenance period. Dose modifications were not allowed. Primary and secondary efficacy end points included change from baseline to week 40 in HbA1c and body weight, respectively. RESULTS: Estimated treatment difference between 16 and 2 mg was -0.3 percentage points (%-points) (95% CI -0.7 to 0.2; P = 0.245) for HbA1c change and -3.4 kg (-6.0 to -0.8; P = 0.011) for weight change for the treatment policy estimand and -0.5%-points (-1.0 to -0.1; P = 0.015) and -4.5 kg (-7.6 to -1.4; P = 0.004), respectively, for the hypothetical estimand. Dose-response modeling confirmed these findings. Treatment-emergent adverse events (AEs) and treatment discontinuations due to AEs, primarily gastrointestinal, were more frequent in the semaglutide 8 and 16 mg groups than in the 2 mg group. No severe hypoglycemic episodes were reported. CONCLUSIONS: Higher semaglutide doses for type 2 diabetes and overweight or obesity provide modest additional glucose-lowering effect, with additional weight loss, at the expense of more AEs and treatment discontinuations. A study for evaluating high-dose semaglutide in obesity is currently underway.

Metformin for Knee Osteoarthritis in Patients With Overweight or Obesity: A Randomized Clinical Trial.
IMPORTANCE: Preclinical and preliminary human evidence suggests that metformin, a first-line treatment for type 2 diabetes, reduces inflammation, preserves cartilage, and improves knee pain in knee osteoarthritis. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of metformin on knee pain at 6 months in participants with symptomatic knee osteoarthritis and overweight or obesity. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Community-based randomized, parallel-group, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial that used telemedicine to recruit and follow up participants remotely. Individuals with knee pain for 6 months or longer, a pain score greater than 40 mm on a 100-mm visual analog scale (VAS), and body mass index of 25 or higher were recruited from the community through local and social media advertisements in Victoria, Australia, between June 16, 2021, and August 1, 2023. Final follow-up occurred on February 8, 2024. INTERVENTIONS: Participants were randomly assigned to receive either oral metformin, 2000 mg/d (n = 54), or identical placebo (n = 53) for 6 months. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome was change in knee pain, measured using a 100-mm VAS (score range, 0-100; 100 = worst; minimum clinically important difference = 15) at 6 months. RESULTS: Of 225 participants assessed for eligibility, 107 (48%) were randomized (mean age, 58.8 [SD, 9.5] years; 68% female) and assigned to receive metformin or placebo. Eighty-eight participants (82%) completed the trial. At 6 months, the mean change in VAS pain was -31.3 mm in the metformin group and -18.9 mm in the placebo group (between-group difference, -11.4 mm; 95% CI, -20.1 to -2.6 mm; P = .01), corresponding to an effect size (standardized mean difference) of 0.43 (95% CI, 0.02-0.83). The most common adverse events were diarrhea (8 [15%] in the metformin group and 4 [8%] in the placebo group) and abdominal discomfort (7 [13%] in the metformin group and 5 [9%] in the placebo group). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These results support use of metformin for treatment of symptomatic knee osteoarthritis in people with overweight or obesity. Because of the modest sample size, confirmation in a larger clinical trial is warranted. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ANZCTR Identifier: ACTRN12621000710820.

Comparative Bioequivalence Study of 2 Fixed-Dose Combinations of Vildagliptin and Metformin at a Tablet Strength of 50/1000 mg in Moroccan Volunteers.
This study evaluates the bioequivalence of 2 fixed-dose combinations of vildagliptin (50 mg) and metformin (1000 mg) in healthy Moroccan volunteers. A single-dose, randomized, simple-blind, 2-sequence, 2-period crossover design was conducted with 30 participants, 28 of whom completed the study. The test product was compared to the reference product (by measuring pharmacokinetic parameters, including maximum plasma concentration, area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) from time zero to the last measurable time point, AUC from time zero extrapolated to infinity, and time to maximum concentration. Blood samples were collected at predefined intervals after dosing, and plasma concentrations of vildagliptin and metformin were determined using a validated liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method. Pharmacokinetic analysis showed comparable results between the 2 formulations. Both products met the bioequivalence criteria of 80%-125% for maximum plasma concentration and AUC. Safety assessments revealed no serious adverse events, and both products were well tolerated. The study concluded that the test product is bioequivalent to the reference, supporting its therapeutic interchangeability in managing type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Aripiprazole or metformin for hyperprolactinemia in women with schizophrenia: A 6-month, real-world chart review study.
OBJECTIVES: Antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia is a relevant clinical issue. In this study, we aimed to evaluate the comparative efficacy of adjunctive aripiprazole and metformin in treating antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia among female patients with schizophrenia. METHODS: A chart review of females diagnosed with schizophrenia and hospitalized from 2010 to 2020, all with antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia and elevated serum prolactin levels. Data included antipsychotic types, baseline and post-intervention prolactin levels. Remission was defined as prolactin levels below 25 ng/dL in females. Cox regression and instrumental variables were used to assess remission hazard ratios at 30, 60, and 180 days. RESULTS: Among 652 female inpatients (mean age = 38.8 +/- 12.7 years; 53.2 % on haloperidol, 17.8 % on risperidone) with hyperprolactinemia (mean baseline prolactin: 69.9 +/- 47.8 ng/dL), 366 (56.1 %) received add-on aripiprazole (mean baseline prolactin: 76.5 +/- 51.3 ng/dL) and 286 (43.9 %) received metformin (mean baseline prolactin: 61.5 +/- 41.6 ng/dL). Aripiprazole was associated with decreased prolactin levels on the 30th day with a remission rate of 73.6 % compared to a 15.0 % remission rate in the metformin group. The effect was significantly greater in the low-dose group (aripiprazole </=5 mg). Throughout the 180-day follow-up period, the final remission rate was substantially higher in the aripiprazole group than in the metformin group (77.6 % vs 23.1 %). Aripiprazole outperformed metformin in treating hyperprolactinemia induced primarily by haloperidol (remission rate 79.9 %), quetiapine (72.7 %), olanzapine (68.8 %) and risperidone (65.2 %) (all p < 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: This real-world study suggests that adjunctive aripiprazole therapy effectively reduces prolactin levels in females with antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia. Maximum efficacy is achieved at no >5 mg/day and within 30 days.

Effects of Prebiotic Phytocompound Administration in Gestational Diabetic Dams and Its Influence on Offspring Cognitive Outcomes.
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GD)-induced gut dysbiosis in pregnant mothers may increase the risk of cognitive impairment and neurological disorders in both the mother and offspring as they age. Restoring gut balance could improve cognitive outcomes for both. Despite advancements in GD treatment, side effects have increased, and long-term neurocognitive impacts on offspring born to GD mothers remain underexplored. This study uses a GD mouse model, inducing pancreatic dysfunction in 3-month-old pregnant C57BL/6J mice with Streptozotocin. The efficacy and mechanism of the prebiotic phytocompound green leaf extract (Allmania nodiflora) were assessed, with metformin as the standard. GD dams exhibited weight and glucose reduction, pancreatic IL-6 elevation, GLUT3 reduction, astroglia changes in the cerebral cortex, gut barrier impairment, cognitive impairment, and heightened anxiety compared to controls. Bacterial 16s rRNA sequencing revealed dysbiosis, with reduced Erysipelotrichales in GD dams compared to controls. Metformin lowered blood glucose levels but failed to rescue functional and behavioral phenotypes in both GD dams and offspring. Phytocompound treatment improved blood glucose, reduced pancreatic inflammation, improved gut barrier integrity, reversed dysbiosis, and enhanced brain health. It rescued behavioral deficits and improved cognitive outcomes in offspring, suggesting the prebiotic phytocompound may be a more effective therapeutic agent for GD in humans.

Pharmacokinetics and Safety of a Fixed-Dose Combination of Alogliptin and Extended-Release Metformin Under Fasting and/or Fed Conditions in Healthy Adults.
This phase 1, randomized, open-label, 2 x 2 crossover study evaluated the bioequivalence of fixed-dose combination (FDC) formulations of alogliptin (ALO) and metformin extended-release (MET XR) compared to their individual formulations and assessed the effect of food on FDC pharmacokinetics in healthy participants. The study comprised the high-dose bioequivalence study (ALO 25 mg/MET XR 1000 mg) and the low-dose bioequivalence study (ALO 12.5 mg/MET XR 500 mg), both conducted under fasting conditions, and the food effect study (ALO 12.5 mg/MET XR 1000 mg) conducted under both fasting and fed conditions. Among enrolled participants, 46 of 50 completed the high-dose bioequivalence study, 45 of 51 completed the low-dose bioequivalence study, and 22 of 26 completed the food effect study. Plasma concentrations were analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. The geometric mean ratios of AUC(last) and C(max) for the FDC versus individual formulations were within the bioequivalence range (0.80-1.25) for both ALO and MET XR. ALO's pharmacokinetics were unaffected by food, while MET XR exhibited a significant food effect, with AUC(last) increasing by a factor of 1.63 and T(max) delayed by 2 hours. Given these findings, the FDC should be administered with food, consistent with MET XR monotherapy recommendations.

Mechanistic evaluation of Jiu Wei Qing Zhi Gao in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: insights from network Pharmacology and experimental validation.
CONTEXT: Jiu Wei Qing Zhi Gao (JWQZG), a traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) formulation, is widely utilized in China for managing non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to elucidate the therapeutic mechanisms of JWQZG in the management of NAFLD. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Network pharmacology was employed to predict the potential mechanisms of JWQZG in NAFLD management. In vivo experiments were conducted using C57BL/6J mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD) for 16 weeks, followed by treatment with JWQZG at three dosages (1.85, 3.7, and 7.4 g/kg/day) or metformin (150 mg/kg/day) for 8 weeks. In vitro studies utilized HepG2 cells exposed to 0.5 mM palmitic acid (PA) for 24 h to establish an NAFLD model, followed by exposure to JWQZG-containing serum at three concentrations for an additional 24 h. Western blot analysis was used to analyze the expression levels of key signaling pathway components. RESULTS: Results of network pharmacology analysis identified the insulin signaling pathway as a potential mediator of the protective effects of JWQZG in NAFLD. Treatment with JWQZG markedly reduced hepatic steatosis and improved insulin resistance. This was accompanied by enhanced expression of key components in the insulin signaling pathway, including insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1), phosphorylated PI3K (p-PI3K), phosphorylated AKT (p-AKT), and phosphorylated GSK3beta (p-GSK3beta), compared to the NAFLD model group. CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide robust evidence supporting the therapeutic potential of JWQZG in NAFLD and its modulation of the insulin signaling pathway. Furthermore, the study offers valuable insights for the discovery of anti-NAFLD compounds derived from TCM formulations.

Presence of Ghost Capsules in Stool Mimicking Parasites due to Extended Release Metformin.
BACKGROUND: This case report presents the history, findings, and diagnostic workup of a 28-year-old woman who presented to the hospital with a yellowish, parasite-like structure in her stool. METHODS: The patient had no significant gastrointestinal complaints other than weight loss and decreased appetite, and no parasites or leukocytes were detected on direct examination of the stool. RESULTS: No eosinophilia, elevated C-reactive protein or leukocytosis was detected in laboratory tests. It was suggested that the structure in the stool of the patient whose symptoms occurred after taking extended-release metformin could be a ghost tablet, and further investigation was not considered necessary. CONCLUSIONS: The report emphasizes the importance of considering drug-related side effects, especially ghost pills, in patients with atypical stool findings to avoid unnecessary investigations and anxiety.

Perioperative metformin use in patients undergoing total joint replacement surgery: protocol for a randomised, placebo-controlled pilot study.
INTRODUCTION: Patients with poor perioperative glycaemic control after total joint arthroplasty are at an increased risk of complications, mortality, delayed return to function and increased costs of care. Although correction of hyperglycaemia has been shown to improve patient outcomes, there is a lack of consensus regarding optimal perioperative glucose management after total joint replacement surgery. This pilot study aims to assess the feasibility of performing a multicentre randomised controlled trial to investigate the effect of perioperative metformin use on glycaemic control in the setting of total joint arthroplasty. METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This blinded, placebo-controlled, pilot randomised controlled trial will enrol 40 participants aged 18-99 years undergoing total hip or knee arthroplasty at a single academic tertiary centre. Patients will be randomly allocated to two groups of 20 participants each and will receive metformin or a placebo, respectively, for 2 weeks preoperatively, continued on the day of surgery, and up to 2 days postoperatively. The primary outcome is a composite of four endpoints to assess study feasibility: timely recruitment, timely study drug administration, protocol adherence and retention. Secondary outcomes include perioperative glycaemic variability, sliding scale insulin utilisation, hospital length of stay and 90-day rates of infection, mortality and readmission. Analyses will be on an intention-to-treat basis. ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The protocol was approved by Oregon Health & Science University Institutional Review Board, STUDY00025798. Written informed consent will be obtained for study participation. Findings will be disseminated via publication in peer-reviewed journals and conference presentations. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT06280274.

Dose dependent relationship of metformin use and diabetic peripheral neuropathy risk in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
This study investigated the correlation between metformin use and diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) risk in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and its dose-dependent relationship. The study included new-onset T2DM patients from 2002 to 2013. Patients were divided into two groups based on metformin treatment, and DPN risk was assessed at 2- and 5-year follow-ups. After adjusting for various factors, two logistic models, metformin cumulative defined daily dose (cDDD) and metformin treatment intensity (defined daily dose [DDD]/month), evaluated the metformin-DPN risk association. Results showed that patients with metformin cDDD < 300, 300-500, and > 500 had higher DPN risk at both follow-ups. Odds ratios (ORs) and confidence intervals (CIs) for DPN were 1.74 (1.69-1.79), 2.05 (1.81-2.32), and 2.36 (1.34-4.16) at 2 years and 1.63 (1.60-1.65), 1.82 (1.69-1.96), and 2.17 (1.56-3.03) at 5 years. Similarly, patients with < 10, 10-25, and > 25 DDD/month had higher DPN risk at both follow-ups. Metformin use correlated with DPN risk in T2DM patients, with a dose-dependent relationship. Higher metformin cDDD or treatment intensity increased DPN risk. However, the absence of vitamin B12 data limits the understanding of the underlying mechanisms. Well-designed, large-scale studies are required to evaluate the potential risks of metformin therapy for DPN in patients with T2DM.

Anti-ageing Potential of Metformin Loaded Fennel Oil-Based Nanoemulgel: A Promising Novel Approach for Ultraviolet B-Induced Ageing.
BACKGROUND: Ageing produces structural alteration of skin tissue when exposed to UV radiation, pollution and smoking, resulting in functional decline and mortality of the cells. The proposed study aimed at developing a commercially scalable fennel oil (FO) based metformin-loaded nanoemulsion (MTF-NE) incorporated in the hydrogel (MTF-HYD-NEG) providing anti-ageing effect. METHODOLOGY: The scalable development of phytocompound incorporated nanoemulsion was done using a multi-step process involving excipient screening, optimization of nanoemulsion and thermodynamic stability assessment. The MTF-NE was developed using aqueous titration method containing Tween 80 as the surfactant and Transcutol P as the co-surfactant. The optimized nanoemulsion was incorporated into a hydrogel to form MTF-HYD-NEG. The formulation was characterized based on globule size, polydispersity index (PDI), zeta potential, spreadability, viscosity, and permeability. In vitro drug release and ex vivo permeation studies were conducted to assess sustained drug release. Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) was used to evaluate skin penetration. The in vivo studies were conducted using UV-B radiation induced mice models and old mice models to assess the anti-ageing efficacy through histopathological analysis, immunohistochemistry (MMP-1 expression), and biochemical assays (GSH, SOD, CAT, and MDA levels). RESULT AND DISCUSSION: The characterization of the optimized MTF-NE exhibited a monodispersed pattern with an average globule size of 261.1 nm, PDI of 0.1305 and zeta potential of -4.4 mV. The MTF-NE was then converted into a hydrogel. The permeability of the MTF-HYD-NEG was assessed by in vitro release and ex vivo permeation studies that demonstrated a sustained release effect of Metformin (MTF) with the value of 71.565 +/- 4.995 % over 24 hours and 4.503 +/- 2.669 mg/cm(2) over 8 hours of study. Additionally, the release profile was further validated by the confocal microscopy through the mice's skin tissue. The mean intensity was observed to be 53.472 which was retained at 4.472 at 50 microm depth of permeation demonstrating the better penetration of the nanocarrier. The data displayed by histopathology and MMP-1 expression by immunohistochemistry showed recuperation in the dermal tissue of the mice model seen in the post-treatment group of MTF-HYD-NEG in comparison to the control group and conventional treatment groups and depletion in MMP-1 production, improved dermal collagen and diminished wrinkles. CONCLUSION: The results of the MTF-HYD-NEG formulation displayed enhanced permeability with a prolonged effect, depicting a reduction in MMP-1 expression, which could serve as a promising anti-ageing and antioxidant preparation attributed to the presence of a fennel oil base.

EXPRESS: Effect of insulin aspart combined with insulin detemir and metformin on islet function in newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus.
This trial evaluated the effects of insulin aspart (IAsp) combined with insulin detemir and metformin on islet function in newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).Newly diagnosed T2DM patients (n = 96) were randomly divided into the control group and study group, 48 cases in each group, and treated with insulin detemir + metformin or insulin detemir + metformin + IAsp, respectively. Clinical effect was assessed, and blood glucose, body mass index (BMI), fasting insulin (FINS), insulin dosage, and blood glucose standard time were recorded. The insulin resistance index (homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance) and insulin function index (homeostasis model assessment-beta) were calculated. Adverse reactions were recorded, and quality of life and sleep quality were assessed.The total effective rate of the study group was 95.83%, which was higher than that of the control group 79.17%. The study group had lower blood glucose, BMI, and FINS, less insulin dosage, and shorter blood glucose standard time. Moreover, the study group had lower insulin resistance index and higher insulin function index, as well as better quality of life and sleep quality. The incidence of adverse reactions exhibited no difference between the two groups.Insulin detemir + metformin + IAsp is effective in the treatment of T2DM, which can effectively improve insulin function and blood glucose index, reduce BMI and insulin dosage without increasing adverse reactions, and improve quality of life and sleep quality.

Optimized Nanostructured Lipid Carriers for Metformin: Enhanced Anti-Inflammatory Activity and Protection Against Type 2 Diabetes-Induced Organ Damage.
BACKGROUND: Diabetes is a chronic metabolic disease that causes serious consequences in different organs such as the heart, kidneys, pancreas, and liver. Metformin (MTF) is a common treatment for type 2 diabetes. It controls the blood glucose level by improving insulin sensitivity and glucose absorption. MTF belongs to BCS class III, which is characterized by high solubility and low permeability. Several types of nanoparticles have been developed to overcome the permeability problem of MTF. METHODS: In this study, we prepared nanostructured lipid carriers (NLCs) loaded with metformin (MTF) using hot melt homogenization-ultrasonication. To select the best formulation, the prepared MTF-NLCs were evaluated for entrapment efficiency % (EE%), particle size, zeta potential, polydispersity index (PDI), and in vitro drug release. The optimized formulation was selected based on the high EE%, small particle size, high absolute zeta potential, low polydispersity index, and high in vitro drug release. The optimized formulation was evaluated for surface morphology by transmission electron microscope (TEM) and for further biochemical and histological analyses in a high-fat diet-induced type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in vivo rat model; HFD was administered (44.3-kJ/kg total energy) for four weeks, followed by a single intraperitoneal injection of streptozotocin (STZ). Rats were allocated into four groups; Diabetic (DM), DM+MTF, DM+MTF-NLC, and control group. Serum and tissue samples were processed for inflammatory markers detection and histopathology. RESULTS: The prepared MTF-NLC formulation exhibited high EE% (80.65 +/- 1.95% to 99.31 +/- 3.25%), small particle size (247.72+/-5.74nm-503.23+/-7.26nm), high negative zeta potential (from -31.83+/-0.98mV to -51.6+/-2.64mV), PDI value less than 0.5 for all MTF-NLCs, and controlled drug release. MTF-NLC7 appeared spherical when examined by TEM. MTF and MTF-NLC groups significantly alleviated the degenerative effects of DM in both submandibular glands (SMG) and pancreas. Additionally, treatments improved kidney and liver function reduced serum inflammatory cytokines, and tissue SMG and pancreatic immunostaining of inflammatory cytokines with favorable effects of MTF-NLCs. Moreover, the MTF-NLCs showed a significant reduction of serum inflammatory cytokines, including (TNF-alpha and IL-1beta) and pancreatic TNF-alpha expression, in addition to ameliorating liver and renal functions compared to MTF alone. CONCLUSION: The preparation of MTF as NLCs improved its permeability, enhancing its anti-inflammatory activity and providing more protection against diabetes-induced organ injury.

Benefits and disadvantages of combination therapy with imeglimin and metformin in patients with type 2 diabetes.
BACKGROUND: We retrospectively examined the benefits and disadvantages of adding imeglimin to metformin therapy in patients with type 2 diabetes. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Ninety-four patients with type 2 diabetes who had been administered imeglimin were included in the safety analysis set (SAS). Sixty-four patients who had been treated with imeglimin for over 6 months were included in the full analysis set (FAS). The primary outcome was the change in HbA1c levels in the FAS. The secondary outcomes were gastrointestinal adverse events (AEs) in the SAS and changes in body weight and FIB-4 in theFAS. RESULTS: In the SAS, gastrointestinal AEs occurred in 15 of 40 (38%) metformin users and 6 of 54 (11%) non-users. In the FAS, HbA1c levels were significantly reduced in both metformin users (n = 27, baseline, 8.5 +/- 1.1%;6 months, 7.7 +/- 1.2%) and non-users (n = 37, baseline, 8.0 +/- 0.9%; 6 months,7.4 +/- 0.9%). While body weight (from 72.0 +/- 20.5 kg to 70.9 +/- 20.8 kg) and FIB-4 (from 1.27 +/- 0.57 to 1.17 +/- 0.49) significantly decreased in metformin users, they did not significantly differ in non-users. CONCLUSIONS: Adding imeglimin to metformin therapy demonstrated favorable reductions in HbA1c, body weight, and FIB-4 in patients with type 2 diabetes, although it was associated with the incidence of gastrointestinal AEs. TRIAL REGISTRATION: UMIN000055241.

Metformin and physical performance in older people with probable sarcopenia and physical prefrailty or frailty in England (MET-PREVENT): a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial.
BACKGROUND: Metformin has effects on multiple biological systems relevant to ageing and has been posited as a candidate therapy for sarcopenia and physical frailty. We aimed to test the efficacy and safety of metformin, a candidate geroprotector, to improve physical performance in older people with probable sarcopenia and physical prefrailty or frailty. METHODS: In this double-blind, randomised, parallel-group, placebo-controlled trial (MET-PREVENT), participants aged 65 years and older with a 4-m walk speed of less than 0.8 m/s and probable sarcopenia, characterised by low handgrip strength (<16 kg for women and <27 kg for men) or five times sit-to-stand time of longer than 15 s (or inability to complete five sit-to-stands) were recruited from primary care and hospital clinics in Gateshead and Newcastle, UK. Participants were randomly assigned (1:1), via a web-based system with minimisation to ensure balance by sex and baseline 4-m walk speed, to receive either 500 mg oral metformin or matching placebo three times a day for 4 months. The primary outcome was the adjusted between-group difference in 4-m walk speed at 4 months. The primary outcome was analysed in the intention-to-treat population (ie, all participants randomly assigned to treatment) who had complete data, and safety was assessed in all participants who received at least one dose of study treatment. This study is registered with the ISRCTN registry, ISRCTN29932357, and is now complete. FINDINGS: Between Aug 1, 2021, and Sept 30, 2022, 268 individuals were screened for inclusion in the trial, and 72 participants were randomly assigned to either metformin (n=36) or placebo (n=36; intention-to-treat population). Mean age was 80.4 years (SD 5.7), 42 (58%) of 72 participants were female, 30 (42%) were male, and 70 (97%) were White British. 70 (97%) of 72 participants had complete follow-up data (n=34 in the metformin group and n=36 in the placebo group). Mean 4-m walk speed at 4 months was 0.57 m/s (SD 0.19) in the metformin group and 0.58 m/s (0.24) in the placebo group (adjusted treatment effect 0.001 m/s [95% CI -0.06 to 0.06]; p=0.96). 108 adverse events occurred in 35 (100%) of 35 participants who received metformin and 77 adverse events occurred in 33 (92%) of 36 participants who received placebo, and 12 (34%) of 35 participants had hospital admissions in the metformin group versus three (8%) of 36 participants in the placebo group. One death occurred, in the metformin group (one [3%] of 35), and was judged to be unrelated to study treatment. INTERPRETATION: Metformin did not improve 4-m walk speed and was poorly tolerated in this population. FUNDING: National Institute for Health and Care Research Newcastle Biomedical Research Centre.

Metformin treatment for patients with hand osteoarthritis: protocol for the multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled METRO trial.
INTRODUCTION: Hand osteoarthritis (OA) is a prevalent joint disorder with limited treatment options. Accumulating evidence suggests that the antidiabetic drug metformin has beneficial effects on knee OA and may likewise be beneficial for hand OA. The objective of this randomised, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial is to investigate the effect of metformin 1000 mg two times a day, or maximum tolerated dose, compared with placebo on reducing finger joint pain after 16 weeks of treatment. METHODS AND ANALYSIS: The participants will be enrolled from the OA clinic at the Parker Institute at Copenhagen University Hospital - Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg, Copenhagen, Denmark and from the Department of Rheumatology, Hospitalsenhed Midt, Silkeborg, Denmark. 150 participants with painful hand OA according to the American College of Rheumatology criteria will be randomly allocated in a 1:1 ratio to receive either metformin or a matching placebo for 16 weeks. The initial dose of 500 mg of metformin or placebo once daily is increased by 500 mg every week until the target dose of 1000 mg two times a day, or the maximum tolerated dose, is reached. The participants will have clinical visits every 4 weeks, except the week 12 visit, which is by telephone. The primary endpoint is the between-group difference in least squares means for the change in the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) finger joint pain scores between the metformin and placebo groups at 16 weeks. The main analysis will be conducted on the intention-to-treat population, comprising all participants assessed and randomly assigned at baseline. Least squares means and the differences between them, along with their respective 95% CIs, will be derived from a mixed-effects model for repeated measurements (outcomes collected at baseline and at weeks 4, 8, 12 and 16). Adverse events will be registered systematically. ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Approval has been obtained from the European Medicines Agency (EudraCT: 2023-509181-38-00), which also includes approval from the local health research ethics committee. Written informed consent will be obtained from all participants. Study findings will be published in international peer-reviewed journals and will be presented in relevant media and at international scientific conferences. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: EudraCT, 2023-509181-38-00; ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT06367283.

Tolerability, safety and feasibility of metformin combined with chemoradiotherapy in patients with locally advanced cervical cancer: A phase II, randomized study.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Locally advanced cervical cancer is treated with chemoradiotherapy. The treatment-related morbidity is high. Tumor hypoxia has prognostic impact and represents a valid, interventional target. This phase II study investigated efficacy of the antidiabetic drug metformin to modify hypoxia according to established biomarkers. Preliminary results including tolerability, safety and feasibility are reported here. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients were included in a 1:1 randomized, open-label design, comparing standard chemoradiotherapy +/- metformin. Metformin 850 mg twice daily was administered 1 week before and during chemoradiotherapy. Magnetic resonance images (MRI) and tumor biopsies were collected at baseline, after 1 week of metformin treatment, and at brachytherapy for biomarker assessments. Tolerability and safety were determined by treatment completion rates and frequency of adverse events (AEs). Safety was further evaluated by possible increase in MRI-based hypoxia during the first week of metformin. Feasibility was determined by proportion of completed study interventions and imaging and biopsy procedures. RESULTS: In total, 18 and 23 patients were allocated to the intervention and control arm, respectively. Eighteen and 15 patients completed metformin treatment for 1 and 5 weeks. Frequency of AEs >/= grade 3 was not significantly different between study arms. Most AEs were gastrointestinal toxicities. Tumors with increase in hypoxia during the first week were all below the defined safety limit. A total of 98% of scheduled MR series and biopsies were collected with satisfactory quality. INTERPRETATION: Addition of metformin to chemoradiotherapy is tolerable and safe. Serial sampling of MRI and tumor biopsies for hypoxia biomarker assessment is feasible.

Safety and efficacy of fixed-dose combination of dapagliflozin and saxagliptin in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus - a phase 4 study in India.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the post-marketing safety profile of a once-daily fixed-dose combination (FDC) of dapagliflozin (10 mg) and saxagliptin (5 mg) given orally for 24 weeks or until discontinuation, in Indian patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) who are on stable dose of metformin. DESIGN: Prospective, single-arm, multicenter study. SETTING: Adult patients with T2DM enrolled from April 2021 to March 2023 across 9 study sites in India. OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary objective was to determine the adverse event (AE) profile of the FDC. Additionally, we assessed changes in glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), fasting plasma glucose (FPG), systolic blood pressure, and body weight at 24 weeks, compared to baseline. RESULTS: Of the 196 patients (median age [range]: 53 [20 to 78] years) analyzed, 61.2% were males with mean +/- standard deviation [SD] duration of T2DM of 7.1 +/- 5.7 years. Overall, 111 (56.6%) presented with >/=1 comorbidity; the most frequent being hypertension (57; 29.1%). At 24 weeks, a total of 22 patients (11.2%) experienced 40 AEs; the majority of them had mild AEs. The most frequent AEs included urinary tract infection (5; 2.6%), pyrexia (5; 2.6%), nasopharyngitis (3; 1.5%), and balanoposthitis (3; 1.5%). The AEs of special interest reported were genital tract infection (3; 1.5%) and hypoglycemia (1; 0.5%). No serious AEs were reported. None of the AEs required treatment discontinuation. Three (1.5%) patients had AEs leading to temporary interruption of the study drug. No deaths were reported in this study. The mean absolute change in HbA1c (1.2% +/- 1.1%), FPG (24.4 +/- 62.9 mg/dL), and weight (2.1 +/- 4.0 kg) from baseline to 24 weeks was statistically significant (p < 0.0001). CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated the safety and efficacy of once-daily FDC of dapagliflozin and saxagliptin when added to metformin in Indian patients with T2DM.

Enhancing Diabetes Treatment: Comparing Pioglitazone/Metformin with Dapagliflozin Versus Basal Insulin/Metformin in Type 2 Diabetes.
AIM: The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy and safety of fixed-dose combination (FDC) of pioglitazone and metformin supplemented with dapagliflozin (test group) with those of basal insulin supplemented with metformin (control group) in patients with inadequately controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). METHODS: This 16-week, prospective, randomized, open-label study enrolled patients aged 18-75 years with glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) levels between >/= 8% and </= 11%. The primary endpoint was the proportion of patients who achieved HbA1c < 7% at week 16 without hypoglycemia or weight gain. The secondary endpoints included blood glucose, lipid profile, body weight, body mass index, inflammatory markers, bone Gla-protein, liver enzymes, and patient satisfaction. RESULTS: Among the full analysis set of 147 participants, no significant difference was observed in the primary endpoint between the test group and the control group. However, the test group had a higher percentage of patients who achieved HbA1c <7% at week 16 without hypoglycemia and experienced a weight loss of >/=3% (31.51% vs 13.51%, P=0.009). Patients in the test group whose BMI>/=24 kg/m(2) also achieved a substantial achievement rate (36.73% vs 15.79%, P=0.014). The test group also exhibited a greater reduction in body weight and improvements in 2-hour postprandial glucose level, systolic blood pressure, and lipid profile. Notably, combination therapy did not increase the risk of hypoglycemia or weight gain. Patients in the test group were more satisfied than those in the control group with continuing to accept pioglitazone/metformin FDC combined with dapagliflozin. CONCLUSION: In the absence of contraindications, pioglitazone/metformin FDC supplemented with dapagliflozin may serve as a safe and effective alternative to basal insulin combined with metformin for rectifying inadequate glucose control, as the former enables metabolic improvements without compromising safety. CHINESE CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRY NUMBER: CHiCTR2000036076. https://www.chictr.org.cn/showproj.html?proj=58825.

A randomized phase II/III study of paclitaxel/carboplatin/metformin versus paclitaxel/carboplatin/placebo as initial therapy for measurable stage III or IVA, stage IVB, or recurrent endometrial cancer: An NRG oncology/GOG study.
INTRODUCTION: We evaluated the efficacy of the addition of the anti-diabetic drug metformin to standard-of-care paclitaxel and carboplatin (PC) in patients with advanced and recurrent endometrial cancer (EC). METHODS: In this phase II/III trial, EC patients with chemotherapy-naive stage III/IVA (with measurable disease) and stage IVB or recurrent (with or without measurable disease) disease were randomly assigned to PC/metformin (850 mg BID) versus PC/placebo. Metformin or placebo was continued as maintenance therapy after completion of PC until disease progression. The primary endpoint of phase II was progression-free survival (PFS). The primary endpoint of phase III was overall survival (OS). Secondary endpoints were objective response, duration of response, and toxicity. RESULTS: From 3/17/2014 to 12/22/2017, 448 patients were randomized to phase II/III studies, and the data were frozen for interim analysis. The phase II study deemed metformin worthy of further investigation in the phase III study. The interim phase III analysis stopped accrual for futility on 2/1/2018. The addition of metformin to PC had a slightly higher hazard of death compared to the PC regimen (HR = 1.088; 90% CI 0.803 to 1.475), which was sufficient to close the study early. The PFS had (HR = 0.814; 90% CI 0.635 to 1.043). At a median follow-up of 10 months and 121 deaths, median OS was not determined and 28 months, on PC/placebo and PC/metformin, respectively. CONCLUSION: The hazard ratios for PFS and OS endpoints was not sufficiently decreased with the addition of metformin to PC to justify continuing the trial.

Mitigating Doxorubicin-Induced Cardiotoxicity and Enhancing Anti-Tumor Efficacy with a Metformin-Integrated Self-Assembled Nanomedicine.
Doxorubicin (Dox) is a potent chemotherapeutic agent commonly used in cancer treatment. However, cardiotoxicity severely limited its clinical application. To address this challenge, a novel self-assembled nanomedicine platform, PMDDH, is developed for the co-delivery of Dox and metformin, an antidiabetic drug with cardioprotective and anti-tumor properties. PMDDH integrates metformin into a polyethyleneimine-based bioactive excipient (PMet), with Dox intercalated into double-stranded DNA and a hyaluronic acid (HA) coating to enhance tumor targeting. The PMDDH significantly improves the pharmacokinetics and tumor-targeting capabilities of Dox, while metformin enhances the drug's anti-tumor activity by downregulating programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) and activating the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) signaling pathway. Additionally, the DNA component stimulates the cyclic GMP-AMP synthase-stimulator of interferon genes (cGAS-STING) pathway, which synergizes with Dox-induced immunogenic cell death (ICD) to promote a robust anti-tumor immune response. PMDDH markedly reduces Dox-induced cardiotoxicity by preserving mitochondrial function, reducing reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, and inducing protective autophagy in cardiomyocytes. These findings position PMDDH as a promising dual-function nanomedicine that enhances the anti-tumor efficacy of Dox while minimizing its systemic toxicity, offering a safer and more effective alternative for cancer therapy.

Analytical Methods for Estimating Metformin Hydrochloride, Pioglitazone and Teneligliptin in Diabetes Management: a Comprehensive Review.
Diabetes mellitus remains a global health challenge, with a growing need for effective therapies. Metformin, Pioglitazone and Teneligliptin are widely prescribed medications for diabetes management. Accurate and precise estimation of these drugs is essential to ensure optimal therapeutic efficacy while minimizing side effects. This comprehensive review examines a multitude of analytical methods employed for the quantification of Metformin, Pioglitazone and Teneligliptin individually as well as in combine pharmaceutical dosage form focusing on their strengths, limitations and applicability within the realm of diabetes treatment. The choice of analytical method depends on various factors, such as the specific formulation, sample matrix complexity and the required sensitivity and quantification range. This review encompasses a wide range of analytical techniques, including spectroscopic methods (ultraviolet-visible, Fourier transform infrared and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy), chromatographic methods (high-performance liquid chromatography, ultra-high performance liquid chromatography, and gas chromatography, high-performance thin-layer chromatography, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry), electrochemical approaches and emerging technologies like mass spectrometry and biosensors. Additionally, it delves into the intricacies of method development and validation, sample preparation and the importance of stability-indicating methods. Recent advancements in sample extraction and preparation techniques are explored to enhance sensitivity and accuracy. By offering a comprehensive assessment of the analytical methods used for the estimation of Metformin, Pioglitazone and Teneligliptin for diabetes treatment, this review serves as a valuable resource for researchers, clinicians and pharmaceutical scientists. It aids in selecting the most suitable analytical method for specific applications, contributing to the continuous improvement of diabetes management and treatment.

An overview of insulin therapy for the non-specialist.
Nearly all health professionals, whatever their practice or speciality, now have contact with a significant number of insulin-using people with diabetes. People with type 1 diabetes are nearly universally managed on more complex insulin regimens, increasingly with complex support technology, and with some understanding of the concepts underlying these needed by anyone with responsibility for other aspects of their health care. People with type 2 diabetes usually come to insulin therapy in time, now with a prevalence for insulin administration of  approximately 50%, thanks to improved management of associated health risks giving longer life expectancy. But while some understandings have simplified the usual approach (basal insulin, self-adjustment dose algorithms), the advent of other medical products offering cardio-renal protection, the use of insulin in combination with these, and the marketing of novel insulin analogues and biosimilars, have all added complexity to clinical decision making. However for the insulin user in the mainstream of care (ambulatory diabetes services in primary and secondary care) the broad principles of choice and management of insulin therapy are fairly easily applied. In the current article, the complexity is dissected and addressed, some of the stigma around insulin therapy is neutralised, and the fundamental approach in regular care drawn into focus. PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY: Insulin therapy is used in their diabetes lifetime by nearly all people with type 2 diabetes (T2DM), as well as in all people with type 1 diabetes (T1DM). In T2DM this is in the context of the usual progression of islet B-cell secretory failure, but also very often in the context of other conditions, from cancer or steroid therapy to acute arterial events or major surgery. Its prescription in these circumstances means that, in pharmaco-epidemiological studies, insulin use is invariably associated with poor health outcomes, but in a series of major RCTs of 5-15 years duration no excess of vascular or oncological adverse health outcomes was found. Physiologically insulin secretion occurs in two scenarios, namely basal insulin at night and between meals ( approximately 50%), and in short ( approximately 4 h) bursts with meals ( approximately 50%). The former suppresses liver glucose production, which in its absence causes plasma glucose to rise threefold to around 12 mmol/l (but much higher if metabolic stress or with sugar-containing drinks). Meal-time insulin secretion in addition promotes glucose storage in skeletal muscle. People with T1DM, having no endogenous insulin secretion, thus require a multiple injection regimen (basal + meal-time), or pumped insulin, often now moderated by continuous glucose monitoring (CGM). Basal and meal-time preparations of pharmaceutical insulin analogues are also used for T2DM, with GLP-1RA and metformin usually continued. The starting regimen is normally basal only, usually with insulin glargine (100 U/ml), originator or biosimilar, while insulin degludec or glargine 300 U/ml can have advantage as basal insulins where true 24-h cover is found to be needed. Weekly insulins (developmental or marketed) may have a role in injection acceptability in T2DM, at a cost of some increase in hypoglycaemia. In ambulatory care a meal-time insulin analogue, originator or biosimilar, is added when required, often after some years on basal insulin. Meal insulins are also used in insulin pumps. Hypoglycaemia is a significant issue in T1DM, limiting insulin dosing, but can be helped by CGM, with or without pumps, and careful dose adjustment. It is a much lesser issue in T2DM, until meal-time insulins are introduced, or in people of thinner phenotype, whence again expertise in dose adjustment may be needed. Body weight gain with insulin is usually modest, particularly if basal insulin is begun appropriately before glycosuria has influenced calorie balance. In mainstream ambulatory care the broad principles of insulin therapy are fairly easily applied, the main resources being team familiarity with a basal insulin (glargine/biosimilar), a finger-prick glucose-monitoring system, basic patient education on use of these, and time to supervise dose titration. Beginning with a fixed dose (e.g. 10 U/day) and increasing by 2 U twice a week is simple, but may take months of persistent input to reach target fasting plasma glucose levels. In conclusion, insulin is a usual therapy in both T1DM and T2DM, and in the latter initially at least is fairly easily applied, in combination with other glucose-lowering agents. However it can be more challenging in the context of the technology used in T1DM, once meal-time insulin is added to basal in T2DM, and when dose requirements are complex and unstable in conjunction with other medical conditions.

Efficacy and safety of 11 sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors at different dosages in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients inadequately controlled with metformin: a Bayesian network meta-analysis.
OBJECTIVES: Assess the efficacy and safety profiles of different sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors (SGLT2is) as an add-on to metformin in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) patients. DESIGN: Bayesian network meta-analysis. DATA SOURCES: PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, Web of Science and ClinicalTrials.gov were searched before 18 December 2024. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) evaluating T2DM patients taking one of 12 SGLT2is as add-on therapy to metformin. Efficacy outcomes focused on glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) reduction, fasting plasma glucose (FPG) reduction and weight loss (WL). Safety outcomes included adverse events (AEs), serious AEs (SAEs), hypoglycaemia, urinary tract infections (UTI) and genital infections (GI). DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Two investigators independently extracted data. The quality of the included studies was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool (V.2.0) for RCTs. RESULTS: 23 RCTs involving 9144 patients and 11 SGLT2is were included. Compared with placebo, most SGLT2is reduced HbA1c (mean difference (MD), -0.45~-0.80%), FPG (MD, -0.78~-2.02 mmol/L) and body weight (MD, -0.88~-2.67 kg). Only 10 mg of henagliflozin increased the incidence of AEs, and none of the included interventions increased the risks of SAEs or UTIs. 50 mg of empagliflozin exhibited higher risks of hypoglycaemia. Only 10 mg of empagliflozin increased the risk of GI. According to the surface under the cumulative ranking values, SGLT2is with optimal efficacy and safety were 15 mg of ertugliflozin in HbA1c reduction, 300 mg of canagliflozin in FPG reduction, WL and hypoglycaemia, 400 mg of sotagliflozin in total AEs, 10 mg of ertugliflozin and 150 mg of ipragliflozin in SAEs, 12.5 mg of ipragliflozin in UTI and 1 mg of ertugliflozin in GI. CONCLUSIONS: As add-on therapy, SGLT2is demonstrated favourable antidiabetic efficacy and acceptable safety. 300 mg of canagliflozin was the best option among the included interventions considering favourable glucose control and WL. Some novel SGLT2is (eg, henagliflozin) exhibited promising efficacy and safety profiles, but more research is needed to validate the findings.

Olaparib combined to metronomic cyclophosphamide and metformin in women with recurrent advanced/metastatic endometrial cancer: the ENDOLA phase I/II trial.
Endometrial cancers are characterized by frequent alterations in the PI3K-AKT-mTor, IGF1 and DNA repair signaling pathways. Concomitant inhibition of these pathways was warranted. ENDOLA phase I/II trial (NCT02755844) was designed to assess the safety/efficacy of the triplet combination of the PARP inhibitor olaparib, metronomic cyclophosphamide (50 mg daily), and PI3K-AKT-mTor inhibitor metformin (1500 mg daily) in women with recurrent endometrial carcinomas. Olaparib dose-escalation (100-300 mg twice-a-day (bid)) was used to determine the recommended-phase II-trial-dose (RP2D, primary endpoint), followed by an expansion cohort to determine the non-progression rate at 10 weeks (NPR-10w, secondary endpoint). 31 patients were treated. Olaparib RP2D was defined as 300 mg bid. The tolerability was acceptable, and grade 3-4 adverse events (51% patients) were mainly hematological. The NPR-10w was 61.5%, and the median progression-free survival (mPFS) was 5.2 months. In a post-hoc analysis, when explored by molecular subtypes/alterations, longer PFS were observed in patients with tumors characterized by a non-specific-molecular-profile (NSMP, n = 4; mPFS, 9.1 months), and by both TP53 altered & high number of large genomic alterations (LGA >/= 8)(n = 10, mPFS, 8.6 months)). The analyses about kinetics of circulating biomarkers and pharmacodynamic effects are not reported here. In total, the benefit/toxicity ratio of the all-oral olaparib/cyclophosphamide/metformin regimen was favorable in heavily pretreated patients with recurrent endometrial cancer.

Analysis of patient characteristics and safety of insulin glargine U300 use in 21 359 patients with type-2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease: DPV registry study.
AIMS: Managing type-2 diabetes (T2D) in chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients requires consideration of kidney function, and many drugs have not been investigated thoroughly. Clinical studies have demonstrated Glargine U300 (Gla-300) supports achievement of adequate glycemic control at low hypoglycemia risk. MATERIALS AND METHOD: This cross-sectional study analysed routine data of 21 359 T2D patients with CKD (1786 using Gla-300; 19 568 without any insulin) from the prospective Diabetes-Patienten-Verlaufsdokumentation (DPV) registry to evaluate patient characteristics and safety of Gla-300 use across different CKD stages. RESULTS: Patients on Gla-300 had T2D onset at an earlier age (median age 55.1 vs. 62.3 years), longer diabetes duration (17.3 vs. 11.3 years), higher body weight (91.3 vs. 83.9 kg) and HbA1c levels (7.3% vs. 6.7%) than non-insulin patients (all p < 0.001). Gla-300 usage increased from CKD stage 1-4 (median dose 44 vs. 55 units) with higher baseline HbA1c levels (7.2% vs. 7.4%). Although severe hypoglycemia rates were low, a slight increase (0.01%/PY vs. 0.04%/PY) was observed with decreasing estimated glomerular filtration rate levels. Compared to others, stage 5 CKD patients had a distinct profile with lower HbA1c levels (6.9%), body weight (90 kg) and higher Gla-300 usage (50 units). Metformin, SGLT-2 inhibitors and GLP-1 RA were common concomitant drugs with diminished usage in advanced CKD stages, while Gla-300 was common at all stages. CONCLUSION: Despite variations in patient profiles, Gla-300 is widely used across all CKD stages, particularly in advanced stages with a low rate of severe hypoglycemia, suggesting its safe administration in CKD patients.

Fixed dose combination of dapagliflozin, glimepiride and extended-release metformin tablets in patients with type 2 diabetes poorly controlled by metformin and glimepiride: A phase III, open label, randomized clinical study in India.
AIM: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of a triple fixed-dose combination (FDC) therapy of dapagliflozin + glimepiride + metformin hydrochloride extended-release (DAPA + GLIM + MET ER) tablets in Indian patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) inadequately controlled by combination of GLIM + MET. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A phase III, randomized, open-label, active-controlled study was conducted for a maximum 30 weeks (primary treatment [16 weeks]; uptitration [12 weeks] and follow-up [2 weeks]). Eligible patients were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to receive either the FDC of DAPA + GLIM + MET ER or the FDC of GLIM + MET prolonged-release (PR) once-daily. The primary efficacy endpoint was a change in glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) from baseline to week 16. RESULTS: The mean reduction in HbA1c from baseline to week 16 was significantly greater with the FDC of DAPA + GLIM + MET ER compared to the FDC of GLIM + MET PR (-1.98% +/- 1.01% vs. -1.64% +/- 0.86%, p = 0.0047). The mean reduction in HbA1c from baseline to week 12 was significantly greater with the FDC of DAPA + GLIM + MET ER versus dual FDC (p < 0.0001). The proportion of patients achieving HbA1c <7.0% was significantly greater with the FDC of DAPA + GLIM + MET ER versus dual FDC at week 12 (19.1% vs. 6.5%; p = 0.0002) and week 16 (52.6% vs. 36.7%; p = 0.0015). A significant decrease in HbA1c, fasting and post-prandial blood glucose from baseline to weeks 12, 16, and 28 was observed in both arms. The incidence of TEAEs was similar across both arms. CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated that the FDC of DAPA + GLIM + MET ER tablets once daily was significantly better than dual FDC in achieving glycaemic control in patients with poorly controlled T2DM. Both treatments were well-tolerated. TRIAL REGISTRATION: CTRI/2022/03/041424, registered on 28 March 2022.

The Pharmacokinetic Interaction Between Metformin and the Natural Product Goldenseal Is Metformin Dose-Dependent: A Three-Arm Crossover Study in Adults With Type 2 Diabetes.
Pharmacokinetic drug interactions can lead to unexpected changes in plasma concentrations of the object drug, potentially increasing the risk for adverse effects and/or decreasing therapeutic efficacy. The botanical product goldenseal was previously shown to decrease metformin systemic exposure in healthy adults. This three-arm, open-label, crossover clinical study assessed the pharmacokinetic goldenseal-metformin interaction in adults with type 2 diabetes stabilized on therapeutic doses of metformin (500-2550 mg daily). The aggregate pharmacokinetic data indicated no clinically meaningful interaction as determined by the metformin area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) geometric mean ratio [90% confidence interval] of 0.93 [0.86-1.01] laying within the predefined no-effect range (0.80-1.25). However, metformin AUC decreased by ~20%, 14%, and 0% after goldenseal coadministration at low (500-750 mg), moderate (1000-1500 mg), and high (2000-2550 mg) metformin doses, respectively; renal clearance and half-life remained unchanged throughout. The exploratory pharmacodynamic endpoint, HbA1c, decreased on average from 6.8% to 6.5%, regardless of the effects of goldenseal on metformin pharmacokinetics. The decreasing effect of goldenseal on metformin systemic exposure with increasing metformin dose, coupled with no changes in renal excretion and elimination half-life, indicated that both the pharmacokinetic goldenseal-metformin interaction and the nonlinear absorption of metformin are governed by saturable, intestinal transport mechanism(s). The disconnect between changes in metformin systemic exposure and therapeutic effects emphasizes the need to evaluate clinical biomarkers to comprehensively assess drug interaction risks, particularly those involving natural products. Healthcare providers may consider cautioning patients about supplementing metformin pharmacotherapy with goldenseal to avoid risks for undesired changes in glycemic control. Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT05081583.

Dose-Dependent Relationship Between Long-Term Metformin Use and the Risk of Diabetic Retinopathy: A Population-Based Cohort Study.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Recent research has raised concerns about the association between metformin treatment in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM) and an increased risk of diabetic retinopathy. We sought to investigate this relationship, specifically examining if metformin use affects diabetic retinopathy risk in a dose-dependent manner. METHODS: This study was a secondary data analysis based on a nationwide population database in Taiwan. Patients with new-onset DM, an age of 20 years or older, and a diagnosis of type 2 DM received at any time during 2002-2013 were included in the study. Patients diagnosed with new-onset type 2 DM between 2002 and 2013 were enrolled as the study population. We divided them into two groups: those treated with metformin and those treated with sulfonylureas. A Cox proportional hazards model was employed to estimate the risk of diabetic retinopathy after 5 years of follow-up, including cumulative defined daily dose and intensity of metformin treatment. RESULTS: A total of 241,231 patients received treatment with metformin, while 152,617 patients were treated with sulfonylureas. Compared with patients treated with sulfonylureas, patients who received metformin treatment, at a cumulative defined daily dose < 30, had a lower risk of diabetic retinopathy (adjusted hazard ratio = 0.77; 95% confidence interval 0.60-0.98). However, those with varying defined daily doses, especially at a higher metformin treatment level (> 25 defined daily dose), had a 2.43 times higher risk of diabetic retinopathy (95% confidence interval 1.37-4.30) compared with patients treated with sulfonylureas. CONCLUSIONS: Patients with DM treated with a lower cumulative dosage of metformin showed beneficial effects that were associated with a lower risk of diabetic retinopathy. In contrast, a higher intensity of metformin use had a greater risk of diabetic retinopathy.

Metformin for patients with advanced stage ovarian cancer: A randomized phase II placebo-controlled trial.
OBJECTIVE: The primary aim of this study was to determine if metformin, an oral biguanide administered with first-line chemotherapy and continued as maintenance therapy, improves progression-free survival (PFS) for patients with advanced-stage ovarian cancer. METHODS: Patients with pathologically confirmed advanced-stage ovarian cancer undergoing primary debulking or neoadjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy followed by surgery were eligible to participate. Patients were randomized 1:1 to receive platinum/taxane-based chemotherapy with metformin 850 mg orally twice per day or placebo, followed by maintenance therapy (metformin or placebo) for two years from the date of randomization. RESULTS: 108 evaluable patients were enrolled; 54 were randomly assigned to metformin, and 54 to placebo. Sixty-six percent (n = 71) received neoadjuvant therapy, 31 % (n = 33) primary debulking surgery, and 88 % (n = 93) had tumors of high-grade serous histology. The primary endpoint, PFS, was not significantly different between the treatment groups (1-sided p-value = 0.31; adjusted hazard ratio [HR] = 0.87, 95 % confidence interval [CI]: 0.56-1.36). Median PFS was 15.4 months (95 % CI: 11.2-23,5) for metformin and 14.3 months (95 % CI: 11.6-18.0) for placebo. Overall survival (OS) was not significantly different (2-sided p-value = 0.21; adjusted HR = 1.49, 95 % CI: 0.86-2.59), with a median of 40.7 months (95 % CI: 28.0-48.2) for metformin versus 43.8 months (95 % CI: 35.3-57.2) for placebo. The addition of metformin was well tolerated, and there were no differences in toxicity between the two groups. CONCLUSION: Although it was well-tolerated, adding metformin to first-line platinum/taxane-based therapy does not improve PFS or OS for patients with newly diagnosed advanced stage ovarian cancer.

Hidradenitis Suppurativa Treatment During Pregnancy and Lactation: Navigating Challenges.
Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS), or acne inversa, is a chronic inflammatory skin condition primarily affecting skin folds such as the axilla, groins, and the inframammary, perineal, and perianal regions. It is characterized by painful abscesses, sinus tracts, and scarring. Predominantly affecting young adults, particularly females, HS often emerges during reproductive age, and flares are widely reported during pregnancy and postpartum, underscoring the need to consider management strategies tailored to pregnant or lactating individuals. Moreover, the chronic and relapsing nature of HS, along with challenges related to the safety and compliance of medication use during pregnancy and lactation, as well as various comorbidities and psychological distress, significantly complicate its management in pregnant or lactating women. Treatment options, including topical clindamycin, oral clindamycin-rifampicin, adalimumab, metformin, antiseptic washes, and certolizumab pegol, have accumulated evidence supporting their relative safety in pregnant and lactating women. While certolizumab pegol has shown promising safety data among biologics, it requires more efficacy data in HS. Conversely, while newly approved HS medications such as secukinumab and bimekizumab show promise for the general population, further research is necessary to evaluate their safety profiles in pregnant and breastfeeding individuals. The scant research available on HS in pregnant and lactating women, also shown by our systematic literature review, highlights the need for a comprehensive investigation into the safety, efficacy, and suitability of management strategies.

